Environmental Commands

logout or exit	end terminal session
passwd	change password
date	print date & time
whoami or who am i	list current user in that window
who	list all users logged onto the workstation
man command1	print on-line UNIX manual page for command1
ftp hostname	start file transfer protocol to transfer file between local and remote workstations. Remote workstation is named hostname
telnet hostname	log onto remote workstation named hostname
df -k	print list of disks and current capacity (in kilobytes)
setenv	list environmental variables
which command	list location of executable command

File Manipulation

ls	list contents of current directory. Examples:
ls file.1 lists presence of file.1
ls -l lists presence of file.1 with expanded information
ls -a lists contents of current directory, including files that start with "."
jot file.1	opens jot editor; reads file.1 into jot for editing
cat file.1	show contents of file.1 on screen
more file.1	show contents of file.1 on screen, but doesn't scroll past top of screen
head file.1	show first 20 lines of file.1 on screen
tail file.1	show last 20 lines of file.1 on screen
diff file.1 file.2	shows differences between file.1 and file.2
wc	counts lines, words, and characters in file file.1. Variations:
wc -l counts lines in file file.1
wc -w counts words in file file.1
wc -m counts characters in file file.1
cp file.1 file.2	copies file.1 to file.2. If file.2 exists, it is overwritten. Original file.1 is not removed
mv file.1 file.2	moves file.1 to file.2. If file.2 exists, it is overwritten. Original file.1 is removed
rm file.1	remove file.1. No utilities exist to retrieve it
grep PATTERN file.1	print all lines that contain PATTERN in file.1
lpr file.1	print file.1 on default laser printer
lpr	Show list of available printers and questions to direct your printing of a file to a particular printer
du -sk	print size (in kilobytes) of current directory ("."). Variations:
du -sk * prints sizes (in kilobytes) of all files and sub-directories
du -sk file.1 prints size (in kilobytes) of file.1
compress file.1	reduce the size of file.1 and replace it with a file named file.1.Z. This compressed file is NOT a (readable) ASCII file.
uncompress file.1.Z	restore the compressed file file.1.Z
find . -name file.1 -print	find the loation of file.1 in the directory and sub-directories. Variations:
find . -name "*pattern" -print finds all files that end with pattern.
find . -name file.1 -exec rm '{}' ';' removes all files named file.1.
grep pattern file.1	print only the lines of file.1 that contain pattern
sort file.1	displays contents of file.1 sorted alphabetically. Variations:
sort -n file.1 displays contents of file.1 sorted numerically
sort -r file.1 displays contents of file.1 sorted alphabetically in reverse order.

Directory Manipulation

pwd	show the directory that you are in (present working directory)
cd dir.1	change directory to dir.1
mkdir dir.1	make new directory dir.1
rmdir dir.1	remove EMPTY directory dir.1
rm -r dir.1	remove directory dir.2 AND its contents
cp -r dir.1 dir.2	copy dir.1 (and its contents) to dir.2
mv file.1 dir.1	move file.1 to dir.1
ls	show contents of current directory. Variations:
ls dir.1 shows contents of dir.1
ls -d dir.1 shows PRESENCE of dir.1
du -sk dir.1	show sum of size (in kilobytes) of dir.1 and its contents
tar -cvf dir.1.tar dir.1	store an image of dir.1 and it's contents in file file.1

Process Control

command1&	execute command1 in background
ps -ef	print expanded list of all processes
kill pid1	remove process pid1
<control-c>	interrupt current process
<control-z>	suspend current process
jobs	display background and suspended processes
kill %1	remove suspended process #1
top	display the current, most computer-intensive commands
osview	display the operating system statitistics

System Security

To change the owner's permissions of a file (or directory), the owner can type:
chown u+r file.1   chown u+w file.1   chown u+x file.1
chown u-r file.1   chown u-w file.1   chown u-x file.1
To change the group's permissions of a file (or directory), the owner can type:
chown g+r file.1   chown g+w file.1   chown g+x file.1
chown g-r file.1   chown g-w file.1   chown g-x file.1
To change the permissions of a file (or directory) for everyone else, the owner can type:
chown o+r file.1   chown o+w file.1   chown o+x file.1
chown o-r file.1   chown o-w file.1   chown o-x file.1

Typing shortcuts

file* file? *il* 
history of commands
!! repeat last one
!5 repeat command #5
!com  repeat last command starting with "com"
pipe command ps -ef | grep java



